Add blog post on GPU ecosystem (#59)
JuliaGPU/juliagpu.org: post/2026-06-23-gpu_ecosystem.md

It exposes three factorization methods (LDU, LDLᵀ, and LLᵀ) and fills a gap left by the main CUDA.jl bundle, since cuDSS remains in preview and is shipped separately.

[cuNumeric.jl](https://github.com/JuliaLegate/cuNumeric.jl) wraps NVIDIA's cuPyNumeric C++ API to bring distributed, multi-GPU array computing to Julia.
It provides an `NDArray` abstraction that supports standard array operations (e.g., broadcasting, matmul) and automatically partitions work across multi-GPU systems without intervention from the user.

### Other vendors

Beyond NVIDIA, Julia has backends for every major GPU platform.

[AMDGPU.jl](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/AMDGPU.jl) brings AMD GPU computing to Julia through ROCm integration.
It mirrors the structure of CUDA.jl—providing an array type, a kernel compiler, and library wrappers—for AMD's graphics and compute hardware.

[oneAPI.jl](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/oneAPI.jl) targets Intel GPUs and accelerators through Intel's oneAPI unified programming toolkit.
It provides low-level Level Zero API wrappers, a `oneArray` type that integrates with Julia's array ecosystem, and oneMKL bindings for optimized linear algebra and sparse matrix operations.

> [Metal.jl](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/Metal.jl) enables GPU programming on macOS using Apple's Metal framework, targeting M-series chips.

Reviewer: This is technically more correct now that there exists a macbook with an A-series chip.
```suggestion
[Metal.jl](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/Metal.jl) enables GPU programming on macOS using Apple's Metal framework, targeting Apple Silicon.
```

It provides low-level Level Zero API wrappers, a `oneArray` type that integrates with Julia's array ecosystem, and oneMKL bindings for optimized linear algebra and sparse matrix operations.
This makes Intel GPU hardware—including integrated graphics on many laptops—a first-class target for Julia GPU code.

[Metal.jl](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/Metal.jl) enables GPU programming on macOS using Apple's Metal framework, targeting M-series chips.
The package offers three levels of abstraction: high-level array operations via `MtlArray`, custom kernel programming, and direct Metal API access through ObjectiveC bindings.
While still under active development with some known limitations, it allows Mac users to run GPU-accelerated Julia code without any external hardware.

[OpenCL.jl](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/OpenCL.jl) provides a comprehensive Julia interface to the OpenCL standard, which targets GPUs, FPGAs, DSPs, and multicore CPUs from a single API.
The package supports both traditional OpenCL C kernels and native Julia functions compiled to SPIR-V, making it the most broadly portable of the hardware-specific backends.

> It is a practical choice when targeting hardware not covered by the other backends, or when writing code that needs to run on a wide variety of devices.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is a practical choice when targeting hardware not covered by the other backends, or when writing code that needs to run on a wide variety of devices.
Through [PoCL](https://github.com/pocl/pocl), it also provides a way of running GPU kernels on the CPU.
```

The package supports cross-platform execution on NVIDIA, AMD, Intel, Apple, and software renderers.

### Vendor detection and translation

As the number of backends grows, tooling for selecting and migrating between them becomes important.

[GPUSelect.jl](https://github.com/SimonDanisch/GPUSelect.jl) automates GPU backend selection for KernelAbstractions.jl by detecting available hardware at runtime through driver libraries.
It provides applications with a one-liner interface to load the appropriate backend—whether CUDA, AMDGPU, Metal, oneAPI, or Vulkan—without manual configuration.
The package is designed for end-user applications rather than libraries, handling both detection and, when needed, automatic installation of the relevant backend.

[GPUEnv.jl](https://github.com/hakkelt/GPUEnv.jl) simplifies multi-backend development by automatically detecting available GPU hardware and creating temporary overlay environments containing only the relevant backend packages.

> Rather than permanently including all GPU dependencies in a project, it conditionally activates only the packages that match the host machine's hardware.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Rather than permanently including all GPU dependencies in a project, it conditionally activates only the packages that match the host machine's hardware using lightweight probe functions.
```

> This keeps parent environments lean and fast to resolve, which matters especially in CI and shared HPC environments.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This keeps parent environments lean and fast to resolve.
```

The package also ships two companion sub-packages: GPUArraysCore.jl, which provides the minimal type hierarchy for packages that only need to check whether an array is on a GPU, and JLArrays.jl, a CPU-backed reference implementation used for testing.

[Adapt.jl](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/Adapt.jl) provides a mechanism for converting wrapper types to GPU-compatible formats while preserving their structure.
Unlike `convert()`, the `adapt(T, x)` function knows how to unwrap and re-wrap types like `Adjoint` or `NamedTuple` around GPU arrays rather than discarding them.
GPU libraries including CUDA.jl use Adapt.jl's extension hooks (`adapt_structure` and `adapt_storage`) to make data movement to the device transparent, which is why user-defined structs containing arrays typically only need a single `Adapt.@adapt_structure` annotation to become GPU-compatible.

### Low-level kernels

Two packages provide the primitives for writing custom GPU kernels in a portable way.

[KernelAbstractions.jl](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/KernelAbstractions.jl) is the central abstraction layer for writing GPU kernels that run across multiple hardware backends.

> It provides a unified, minimal `@kernel` macro that compiles to NVIDIA CUDA, AMD ROCm, Intel oneAPI, and Apple Metal without any backend-specific rewrites.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It provides a unified, minimal `@kernel` macro that compiles to NVIDIA CUDA, AMD ROCm, Intel oneAPI, Apple Metal, OpenCL and the CPU without any backend-specific rewrites.
```

It targets both NVIDIA and AMD hardware and aims for performance comparable to optimized C++ libraries, without requiring any non-Julia dependencies.

[JACC.jl](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/JACC.jl) provides a simple vendor-neutral API for CPU and GPU computing.
It targets HPC users familiar with C++ frameworks like Kokkos, RAJA, SYCL or TBB.
Its array construction (`zeros/ones/fill`), `parallel_for` and `parallel_reduce` primitives deploy to NVIDIA, AMD, Apple or Intel GPUs using JuliaGPU's vendor-specific backends.
They can also leverage CPU threads using Polyester.jl.
Backend selection is done outside code using Preferences.jl mechanisms (e.g., `LocalPreferences.toml`).
The package is well-suited for HPC prototyping: developers can write and test kernels on a laptop CPU or GPU and then deploy them to multi-GPU supercomputer nodes without changing any application code.
Users of the default APIs, do not need prior CPU/GPU programming knowledge to parallelize their codes, but JACC.jl provides low-level performance APIs (e.g., blocks, threads, async, shared memory, stream, multi-GPU, etc.) for hardware-specific optimizations.

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

[Strided.jl](https://github.com/QuantumKitHub/Strided.jl) provides a vendor-neutral API for writing `map`- or `mapreduce`- kernels over input arrays with varying strides.
This allows for writing operations that fuse (strided) views and `permutedims` operations with the following kernel calls.
```

Reviewer 4: @Jutho does this sound about right to you?

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

[MatrixAlgebraKit.jl](https://github.com/QuantumKitHub/MatrixAlgebraKit.jl) provides a high-level interface to linear algebra routines provided by the various GPU vendors.
It features a unified way of accessing these kernels that exposes access to more in-place operations than LinearAlgebra.jl, as well as compatibility with the various automatic differentiation libraries.
```

@kshyatt does this sound about right?

+++
title = "State of Julia's GPU ecosystem in 2026"
author = "Guillaume Dalle"
abstract = """
  A summary of the various packages making up Julia's GPU abilities, and how they interact."""
+++

{{abstract}}

> > The text of this post was written by Claude Sonnet 4.6, then reviewed and edited by Guillaume Dalle. The initial structure and list of packages had been manually curated beforehand.

Author: ```suggestion
> The text of this post was written by Claude Sonnet 4.6, then reviewed and edited by Guillaume Dalle and others. The initial structure and list of packages had been manually curated beforehand.
```

Julia's GPU ecosystem has grown into a rich, layered stack that spans everything from vendor-specific low-level wrappers to hardware-agnostic high-level abstractions.
This post gives an overview of the major packages, organized by where they sit in that stack.
The distinction between hardware-specific and hardware-agnostic packages is the key design principle: vendor-specific backends provide raw access to each GPU platform, while a shared set of abstractions lets library authors and users write code that is portable across all of them.

## Hardware-specific

### CUDA ecosystem

The CUDA ecosystem is the most mature part of Julia's GPU stack, built around NVIDIA hardware.

[CUDA.jl](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/CUDA.jl) is the primary interface for programming NVIDIA GPUs in Julia.

> As a meta-package, it bundles a user-friendly array abstraction (`CuArray`), a compiler for writing CUDA kernels directly in Julia, and wrappers for a broad set of CUDA libraries including cuBLAS, cuSPARSE, cuFFT, cuSolver, and cuDNN.

Author: ```suggestion
It bundles a user-friendly array abstraction (`CuArray`), a compiler for writing CUDA kernels directly in Julia, and can be supplemented with wrappers for a broad set of [CUDA libraries](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/CUDA.jl/tree/main/lib) including cuBLAS.jl, cuSPARSE.jl, cuFFT.jl, cuSolver.jl, and cuDNN.jl.
```

> Most Julia users who target NVIDIA hardware start here and never need to go deeper.

Author: ```suggestion
Most Julia users who only target NVIDIA hardware start here and never need to go deeper.
```

[cuTile.jl](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/cuTile.jl) exposes NVIDIA's tile-based programming model, available on Ampere and newer GPUs, through a high-level Julia interface to the Tile IR architecture.

> It shines at fusing complex operations into single kernels and supports specialized numeric types such as FP8 and mixed-precision formats that are central to modern machine learning workloads.

Author: ```suggestion
It can fuse complex operations into single kernels and supports specialized numeric types such as FP8 and mixed-precision formats that are central to modern machine learning workloads.
```

Whereas CUDA.jl covers the breadth of CUDA, cuTile.jl is the tool of choice when squeezing maximum throughput out of NVIDIA's latest tensor cores.

[CUDSS.jl](https://github.com/exanauts/CUDSS.jl) is a Julia wrapper for NVIDIA's cuDSS library, which provides GPU-accelerated sparse linear solvers.
It exposes three factorization methods (LDU, LDLᵀ, and LLᵀ) and fills a gap left by the main CUDA.jl bundle, since cuDSS remains in preview and is shipped separately.

> The package is particularly relevant to scientific computing applications—optimization, finite elements, graph problems—where sparse system solves are a bottleneck.

Author: ```suggestion
```

[cuNumeric.jl](https://github.com/JuliaLegate/cuNumeric.jl) wraps NVIDIA's cuPyNumeric C++ API to bring distributed, multi-GPU array computing to Julia.

> It provides an `NDArray` abstraction that supports standard array operations and can transparently dispatch work across both GPUs and CPUs.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
[cuNumeric.jl](https://github.com/JuliaLegate/cuNumeric.jl) wraps NVIDIA's cuPyNumeric C++ API to bring distributed, multi-GPU array computing to Julia.
It provides an `NDArray` abstraction that supports standard array operations (e.g., broadcasting, matmul) and automatically partitions work across multi-GPU systems without intervention from the user.
```

> The package is a bridge to the Legate runtime, enabling Julia programs to scale to clusters of GPUs with minimal code changes.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

### Other vendors

Beyond NVIDIA, Julia has backends for every major GPU platform.

[AMDGPU.jl](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/AMDGPU.jl) brings AMD GPU computing to Julia through ROCm integration.
It mirrors the structure of CUDA.jl—providing an array type, a kernel compiler, and library wrappers—for AMD's graphics and compute hardware.

> For users on AMD platforms or working with HPC systems where AMD GPUs are prevalent, AMDGPU.jl is the entry point.

Author: ```suggestion
```

[oneAPI.jl](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/oneAPI.jl) targets Intel GPUs and accelerators through Intel's oneAPI unified programming toolkit.
It provides low-level Level Zero API wrappers, a `oneArray` type that integrates with Julia's array ecosystem, and oneMKL bindings for optimized linear algebra and sparse matrix operations.

> This makes Intel GPU hardware—including integrated graphics on many laptops—a first-class target for Julia GPU code.

Author: ```suggestion
```

While still under active development with some known limitations, it allows Mac users to run GPU-accelerated Julia code without any external hardware.

[OpenCL.jl](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/OpenCL.jl) provides a comprehensive Julia interface to the OpenCL standard, which targets GPUs, FPGAs, DSPs, and multicore CPUs from a single API.
The package supports both traditional OpenCL C kernels and native Julia functions compiled to SPIR-V, making it the most broadly portable of the hardware-specific backends.
It is a practical choice when targeting hardware not covered by the other backends, or when writing code that needs to run on a wide variety of devices.
Through [PoCL](https://github.com/pocl/pocl), it also provides a way of running GPU kernels on the CPU.

[Vulkan.jl](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/Vulkan.jl) wraps the Vulkan graphics and compute API, generating bindings automatically from the official Vulkan specification with minimal overhead over the underlying C interface.
Where OpenCL.jl offers portability at the cost of abstraction, Vulkan provides explicit, low-overhead control over GPU resources.

> The package is still pre-1.0 but is actively developed, and serves as the foundation for higher-level graphics and compute work in Julia.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
[Vulkan.jl](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/Vulkan.jl) wraps the Vulkan graphics and compute API, generating bindings automatically from the official Vulkan specification with minimal overhead over the underlying C interface.
Where OpenCL.jl offers portability at the cost of abstraction, Vulkan provides explicit, low-overhead control over GPU resources.
The package hasn't reached 1.0 yet but is maintained and considered stable. It serves as a low-level foundation for higher-level graphics and compute work in Julia, and is rather meant for developers.
```

Rephrasing the last line to make the description more accurate.

[Lava.jl](https://github.com/SimonDanisch/Lava.jl) is a Julia GPU backend that compiles Julia code to SPIR-V for execution via Vulkan, functioning as a unified compute, graphics, and ray tracing platform.
It serves as a drop-in replacement for other GPU backends through the KernelAbstractions.jl and GPUArrays.jl interface, while additionally enabling graphics shaders and hardware-accelerated ray tracing written entirely in Julia rather than GLSL.

> The package supports cross-platform execution on NVIDIA, AMD, Intel, Apple, and software renderers, and has demonstrated 1.4–2.5× speedups over AMDGPU on ray tracing workloads.

Author: ```suggestion
The package supports cross-platform execution on NVIDIA, AMD, Intel, Apple, and software renderers.
```

[Adapt.jl](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/Adapt.jl) provides a mechanism for converting wrapper types to GPU-compatible formats while preserving their structure.
Unlike `convert()`, the `adapt(T, x)` function knows how to unwrap and re-wrap types like `Adjoint` or `NamedTuple` around GPU arrays rather than discarding them.
GPU libraries including CUDA.jl use Adapt.jl's extension hooks (`adapt_structure` and `adapt_storage`) to make data movement to the device transparent, which is why user-defined structs containing arrays typically only need a single `Adapt.@adapt_structure` annotation to become GPU-compatible.

### Low-level kernels

Two packages provide the primitives for writing custom GPU kernels in a portable way.

[KernelAbstractions.jl](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/KernelAbstractions.jl) is the central abstraction layer for writing GPU kernels that run across multiple hardware backends.
It provides a unified, minimal `@kernel` macro that compiles to NVIDIA CUDA, AMD ROCm, Intel oneAPI, Apple Metal, OpenCL and the CPU without any backend-specific rewrites.

> Most hardware-agnostic libraries in Julia—including AcceleratedKernels.jl, Lava.jl, and JACC.jl—build on top of it, making it the glue that holds the portable GPU stack together.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Most hardware-agnostic libraries in Julia—including AcceleratedKernels.jl, Lava.jl—build on top of it, making it the glue that holds the portable GPU stack together.
```

Reviewer 7: JACC.jl builds on top of CUDA.jl, AMDGPU.jl, oneAPI.jl and Metal.jl

[KernelIntrinsics.jl](https://github.com/epilliat/KernelIntrinsics.jl) provides low-level memory access primitives and warp-level operations for GPU kernel authors who need fine-grained control beyond what KernelAbstractions.jl exposes.
It covers memory fencing, warp shuffle and reduction operations, and vectorized memory access, and does so across CUDA, ROCm, and Metal backends.
The package is aimed at library developers rather than end users: it fills the gap between high-level kernel abstractions and the raw hardware intrinsics that performance-critical GPU code sometimes requires.

### High-level kernels

> Several packages build on KernelAbstractions.jl to provide ready-made parallel algorithms.

Author: ```suggestion
Several packages build on lower-level primitives to provide ready-made parallel algorithms.
```

> [AcceleratedKernels.jl](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/AcceleratedKernels.jl) provides cross-architecture parallel algorithms—sorting, reduction, accumulation, and more—that compile from a single codebase to multithreaded CPUs, CUDA, ROCm, oneAPI, and Metal.

Author: ```suggestion
[AcceleratedKernels.jl](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/AcceleratedKernels.jl) provides cross-architecture parallel algorithms—sorting, reduction, accumulation, and more—that compile from a single codebase to multithreaded CPUs, CUDA, ROCm, oneAPI, and Metal.
It has utilities for setting the number of threads, the block size, or pre-allocate scratchspaces.
```

It leverages Julia's compilation model to generate efficient code for each target without maintaining separate hardware-specific implementations.

> For workloads that consist primarily of these standard operations, it offers a "write once, run everywhere" experience with native performance.

Author: ```suggestion
```

[GemmKernels.jl](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/GemmKernels.jl) is a flexible framework for crafting optimized General Matrix Multiplication (GEMM) kernels on NVIDIA GPUs.
It decomposes GEMM into modular, customizable components—parameters, layouts, transforms, operators, and epilogues—that users can mix and match through Julia's multiple dispatch system.

> The package delivers around 50–80% of the performance of cuBLAS and CUTLASS, and is the right tool when the standard BLAS interface is too inflexible for a particular memory layout or numeric type.

Author: ```suggestion
The package can be useful when the standard BLAS interface is too inflexible for a particular memory layout or numeric type.
```

[KernelForge.jl](https://github.com/epilliat/KernelForge.jl) is a pure Julia library of high-performance, portable GPU primitives including map-reduce, prefix scans, matrix-vector products, and sorting.
It targets both NVIDIA and AMD hardware and aims for performance comparable to optimized C++ libraries, without requiring any non-Julia dependencies.

> The package fills a practical gap for authors who need efficient low-level building blocks but want to stay within the Julia ecosystem.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> [JACC.jl](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/JACC.jl) provides a vendor-neutral API for CPU and GPU computing inspired by C++ frameworks like Kokkos and RAJA.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
[JACC.jl](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/JACC.jl) provides a simple vendor-neutral API for CPU and GPU computing for those familiar with C++ frameworks like Kokkos, RAJA, SYCL or TBB to keep user code 100% portable.
```

Reviewer 7: If anything, we are "inspired" by Choy and Edelman's [parallel MATLAB](https://math.mit.edu/~edelman/homepage/papers/pmright.pdf) :)

Reviewer 8: > to keep user code 100% portable.

please keep coloring like this minmal.

Author: ```suggestion
[JACC.jl](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/JACC.jl) provides a simple vendor-neutral API for CPU and GPU computing.
It targets HPC users familiar with C++ frameworks like Kokkos, RAJA, SYCL or TBB.
```

Reviewer 7: > to keep user code 100% portable.

> please keep coloring like this minmal.

Not sure I am following, we are providing this capability that users appreciate.

Author: This blog post is meant to be as neutral as possible, not to promote any individual package. I made a pass to tone down Claude's enthusiasm on other packages too

Reviewer 7: Sorry, but I am missing how listing a distinctive technical feature for users is promoting? If anything, we are promoting the entire ecosystem and the distinctive value each piece brings (I am learning myself and promoting other packages). Anyways, I won't push for this as it's not the type of discussion for this and I appreciate the effort, but we should appreciate what others bring as well if we want to position Julia in HPC.

Another FAQ we get from potential Julia HPC users is package maturity, support and community. Are we listing those?

Author: I found it a bit opinionated too in the sense that no code is ever "100% portable", and this formulation sounded more like advertisement than like a precise assessment.
Besides, the obvious space limitations of this list won't let us go into support and community discussions, although they matter a lot of course!

> Its `parallel_for` and `parallel_reduce` primitives deploy to CUDA, AMD, Metal, oneAPI, or CPU threads from a single codebase, with the backend selected at package load time.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Its `array` (`zeros/ones/fill`), `parallel_for` and `parallel_reduce` primitives deploy to NVIDIA, AMD, Apple or Intel GPUs using JuliaGPU's vendor-specific backends, or CPU threads using `Polyester.jl` from a single codebase. Backend selection is done outside code using `Preferences.jl` mechanisms (e.g., `LocalPreferences.toml`).
```

Author: ```suggestion
Its array construction (`zeros/ones/fill`), `parallel_for` and `parallel_reduce` primitives deploy to NVIDIA, AMD, Apple or Intel GPUs using JuliaGPU's vendor-specific backends.
They can also leverage CPU threads using Polyester.jl.
Backend selection is done outside code using Preferences.jl mechanisms (e.g., `LocalPreferences.toml`).
```

> The package is particularly well suited for HPC workloads: developers can write and test kernels on a laptop CPU and then deploy them to multi-GPU supercomputer nodes without changing any application code.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The package is particularly well suited for HPC workloads: developers can write and test arrays and kernels on a laptop CPU or GPU and then deploy them to multi-GPU supercomputer nodes without changing any application code. Users of the default APIs, do not need prior CPU/GPU programming knowledge to parallelize their codes. Optionally, JACC.jl provides low-level performance APIs (e.g., blocks, threads, async, shared memory, stream, Multi GPU, etc.) for hardware-specific optimizations. Thanks to Julia's metaprogramming, JACC.jl arrays interoperate with the entire JuliaGPU stack (becoming CuArray, ROCArray, etc.), vendor tools, and MPI.jl but in a portable way. JACC.jl reached a stable v1.x version in 2026 and is maintained by a team at Oak Ridge National Laboratory funded by the US Department of Energy.
```

Author: ```suggestion
The package is well-suited for HPC prototyping: developers can write and test kernels on a laptop CPU or GPU and then deploy them to multi-GPU supercomputer nodes without changing any application code.
Users of the default APIs, do not need prior CPU/GPU programming knowledge to parallelize their codes, but JACC.jl provides low-level performance APIs (e.g., blocks, threads, async, shared memory, stream, multi-GPU, etc.) for hardware-specific optimizations.
```

It is particularly useful for expressing data layout transformations that would otherwise require verbose combinations of `reshape`, `permutedims`, and `dropdims`.

[OMEinsum.jl](https://github.com/under-Peter/OMEinsum.jl) implements Einstein summation over arbitrary tensor networks with GPU acceleration via cuBLAS and cuTENSOR.
It uses Julia's multiple dispatch to select the most efficient backend for each contraction—standard matrix multiplication for simple cases, cuTENSOR for general tensor networks—without runtime overhead.
The package is especially valuable in quantum computing and machine learning research, where large tensor network contractions are a core computational primitive.

[TensorOperations.jl](https://github.com/QuantumKitHub/TensorOperations.jl) provides fast tensor contractions, permutations, and traces using Einstein index notation, with GPU acceleration through CUDA and integration with cuTENSOR v2.
The package supports automatic differentiation and offers flexible backend selection, allowing the same high-level expression to dispatch to optimized implementations on whichever hardware is available.

> It is a go-to tool in quantum chemistry and condensed matter physics, where tensor operations on large arrays are ubiquitous.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[TensorOperations.jl](https://github.com/QuantumKitHub/TensorOperations.jl) provides fast tensor contractions, permutations, and traces using Einstein index notation, with GPU acceleration through hardware-agnostic Strided.jl implementations as well as a dedicated cuTENSOR backend.
The package supports automatic differentiation and offers flexible backend selection, allowing the same high-level expression to dispatch to optimized implementations on whichever hardware is available.
It is a go-to tool in quantum chemistry and condensed matter physics, where tensor operations on large arrays are ubiquitous.
```

I am not sure if it could be worth it to make a dedicated mention of Strided.jl, which provides GPU kernels for generic strided map(reduce) operations.

### Whole-program optimization

[Reactant.jl](https://github.com/EnzymeAD/Reactant.jl) takes a different approach to GPU execution: rather than offering array types or kernel abstractions, it compiles entire Julia functions to MLIR and optimizes them for execution on CPUs, GPUs, and TPUs via XLA.

> It works by tracing the program to remove control flow and type instabilities, then handing the resulting computation graph to XLA for whole-program optimization and device dispatch.

Author: ```suggestion
It works by tracing the program to remove control flow and type instabilities, then handing the resulting computation graph to XLA for whole-program optimization and device dispatch.
Starting from you code written with existing packages, like CUDA.jl or KernelAbstractions.jl, Reactant will automatically perform optimizations like kernel fusion, and offload to your chosen architecture.
```

> A companion sub-package, ReactantCore.jl, exposes the minimal type hierarchy needed by other packages to be Reactant-aware, allowing the broader Julia ecosystem to interoperate with Reactant's compilation pipeline.

Reviewer 9: add you can write code with existing pacakges, like CUDA.jl or KernelAbstractions and Reactant will automatically perform optimizations like kernel fusion, and offload to your chosen architecture

Whereas CUDA.jl covers the breadth of CUDA, cuTile.jl is the tool of choice when squeezing maximum throughput out of NVIDIA's latest tensor cores.

[CUDSS.jl](https://github.com/exanauts/CUDSS.jl) is a Julia wrapper for NVIDIA's cuDSS library, which provides GPU-accelerated sparse linear solvers.
It exposes three factorization methods (LDU, LDLᵀ, and LLᵀ) and fills a gap left by the main CUDA.jl bundle, since cuDSS remains in preview and is shipped separately.

[cuNumeric.jl](https://github.com/JuliaLegate/cuNumeric.jl) wraps NVIDIA's cuPyNumeric C++ API to bring distributed, multi-GPU array computing to Julia.
It provides an `NDArray` abstraction that supports standard array operations (e.g., broadcasting, matmul) and automatically partitions work across multi-GPU systems without intervention from the user.

### Other vendors

Beyond NVIDIA, Julia has backends for every major GPU platform.

[AMDGPU.jl](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/AMDGPU.jl) brings AMD GPU computing to Julia through ROCm integration.

> It mirrors the structure of CUDA.jl—providing an array type, a kernel compiler, and library wrappers—for AMD's graphics and compute hardware.

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
It mirrors the structure of CUDA.jl providing an array type (`ROCArray`), a kernel compiler, and library wrappers for AMD's graphics and compute hardware.
```

The package is well-suited for HPC prototyping: developers can write and test kernels on a laptop CPU or GPU and then deploy them to multi-GPU supercomputer nodes without changing any application code.
Users of the default APIs, do not need prior CPU/GPU programming knowledge to parallelize their codes, but JACC.jl provides low-level performance APIs (e.g., blocks, threads, async, shared memory, stream, multi-GPU, etc.) for hardware-specific optimizations.

[Strided.jl](https://github.com/QuantumKitHub/Strided.jl) provides a vendor-neutral API for writing `map`- or `mapreduce`- kernels over input arrays with varying strides.
This allows for writing operations that fuse (strided) views and `permutedims` operations with the following kernel calls.

[MatrixAlgebraKit.jl](https://github.com/QuantumKitHub/MatrixAlgebraKit.jl) provides a high-level interface to linear algebra routines provided by the various GPU vendors.
It features a unified way of accessing these kernels that exposes access to more in-place operations than LinearAlgebra.jl, as well as compatibility with the various automatic differentiation libraries.

> [Lava.jl](https://github.com/SimonDanisch/Lava.jl) is a Julia GPU backend that compiles Julia code to SPIR-V for execution via Vulkan, functioning as a unified compute, graphics, and ray tracing platform.

Reviewer 11: I think this needs to go into lower level kernels section. 
It's really at the same level of the stack as OpenCL.jl/CUDA.jl/AMDGPU.jl and works as a drop in replacement for those, with a few fancy things like the graphics/raytracing shaders on top. 
Lava.jl is to Vulkan.jl as OpenCL.jl is to the opencl driver, just that OpenCL ships the opencl wrapper in the same package, while Vulkan.jl is wrapping the driver in a separate Julia package and Lava builds upon that.

The package is especially valuable in quantum computing and machine learning research, where large tensor network contractions are a core computational primitive.

[TensorOperations.jl](https://github.com/QuantumKitHub/TensorOperations.jl) provides fast tensor contractions, permutations, and traces using Einstein index notation, with GPU acceleration through hardware-agnostic Strided.jl implementations as well as a dedicated cuTENSOR backend.
The package supports automatic differentiation and offers flexible backend selection, allowing the same high-level expression to dispatch to optimized implementations on whichever hardware is available.
It is a go-to tool in quantum chemistry and condensed matter physics, where tensor operations on large arrays are ubiquitous.

### Whole-program optimization

[Reactant.jl](https://github.com/EnzymeAD/Reactant.jl) takes a different approach to GPU execution: rather than offering array types or kernel abstractions, it compiles entire Julia functions to MLIR and optimizes them for execution on CPUs, GPUs, and TPUs via XLA.

> It works by tracing the program to remove control flow and type instabilities, then handing the resulting computation graph to XLA for whole-program optimization and device dispatch.

Reviewer 12: This is not entirely true or is not the best way to phrase it.

```suggestion
It uses operator tracing (aka partial evaluation) to obtain an equivalent MLIR code of the program. It then runs a ton of compiler optimizations that perform automatic differentiation, parallelization and optimization.
It can also trace through control-flow constructs (like `if`, `for` and `while`) by prefixing the `@trace` macro.
```

Starting from you code written with existing packages, like CUDA.jl or KernelAbstractions.jl, Reactant will automatically perform optimizations like kernel fusion, and offload to your chosen architecture.

> A companion sub-package, ReactantCore.jl, exposes the minimal type hierarchy needed by other packages to be Reactant-aware, allowing the broader Julia ecosystem to interoperate with Reactant's compilation pipeline.

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 12: I would remove this because ReactantCore.jl is more like an implementation detail that is required for extension by other packages, just like what ChainRulesCore.jl is for ChainRules.jl. But I'm leaving it up to the writers.

Author: I think it's interesting to point out the possible integration without heavy deps

Reviewer 12: Okay, but then I would fix the phrasing because ReactantCore.jl is not about the type-hierarchy but about the `@trace` macro.

```suggestion
Reactant.jl tries to be as least intrusive as possible, but operator tracing may run into problems with control-flow constructs.
A companion sub-package, ReactantCore.jl, exposes the `@trace` macro, which correctly marks control-flow constructs during tracing. The `@trace` translates to a noop if evaluated outside of the Reactant compilation context, allowing Reactant integration of the broader Julia ecosystem without fully depending on Reactant.
```

opinions @pangoraw @jumerckx @glou-nes? since you guys have worked more with this

> A companion sub-package, ReactantCore.jl, exposes the minimal type hierarchy needed by other packages to be Reactant-aware, allowing the broader Julia ecosystem to interoperate with Reactant's compilation pipeline.

Reviewer 13: ```suggestion
A companion sub-package, ReactantCore.jl, exposes the minimal type hierarchy needed by other packages to be Reactant-aware, allowing the broader Julia ecosystem to interoperate with Reactant's compilation pipeline.

### Task Runtimes
[Dagger.jl](https://github.com/JuliaParallel/Dagger.jl) is a Julia task runtime and scheduler that supports scalable, distributed multi-GPU execution across all 5 main GPU backends, with built-in support for KernelAbstractions-written kernels. Dagger allows the expression of generic scalable algorithms that seamlessly scale from 0 to 1 to N GPUs without having to handle the vagaries of GPU programming and state management - Dagger handles this in the background, while maximizing throughput.
```

[Vulkan.jl](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/Vulkan.jl) wraps the Vulkan graphics and compute API, generating bindings automatically from the official Vulkan specification with minimal overhead over the underlying C interface.
Where OpenCL.jl offers portability at the cost of abstraction, Vulkan provides explicit, low-overhead control over GPU resources.
The package hasn't reached 1.0 yet but is maintained and considered stable. It serves as a low-level foundation for higher-level graphics and compute work in Julia, and is rather meant for developers.

[Lava.jl](https://github.com/SimonDanisch/Lava.jl) is a Julia GPU backend that compiles Julia code to SPIR-V for execution via Vulkan, functioning as a unified compute, graphics, and ray tracing platform.
It serves as a drop-in replacement for other GPU backends through the KernelAbstractions.jl and GPUArrays.jl interface, while additionally enabling graphics shaders and hardware-accelerated ray tracing written entirely in Julia rather than GLSL.
The package supports cross-platform execution on NVIDIA, AMD, Intel, Apple, and software renderers.

> ### High-level kernels

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
### High-level programming
```

The package supports automatic differentiation and offers flexible backend selection, allowing the same high-level expression to dispatch to optimized implementations on whichever hardware is available.
It is a go-to tool in quantum chemistry and condensed matter physics, where tensor operations on large arrays are ubiquitous.

### Whole-program optimization

[Reactant.jl](https://github.com/EnzymeAD/Reactant.jl) takes a different approach to GPU execution: rather than offering array types or kernel abstractions, it compiles entire Julia functions to MLIR and optimizes them for execution on CPUs, GPUs, and TPUs via XLA.
It uses operator tracing (aka partial evaluation) to obtain an equivalent MLIR code of the program. It then runs a ton of compiler optimizations that perform automatic differentiation, parallelization and optimization.
It can also trace through control-flow constructs (like `if`, `for` and `while`) by prefixing the `@trace` macro.

> Starting from you code written with existing packages, like CUDA.jl or KernelAbstractions.jl, Reactant will automatically perform optimizations like kernel fusion, and offload to your chosen architecture.

Reviewer 14: ```suggestion
Starting from your code written with existing packages, like CUDA.jl or KernelAbstractions.jl, Reactant will automatically perform optimizations like kernel fusion, and offload to your chosen architecture.
```

> A companion sub-package, ReactantCore.jl, exposes the minimal type hierarchy needed by other packages to be Reactant-aware, allowing the broader Julia ecosystem to interoperate with Reactant's compilation pipeline.

Author: ```suggestion
Reactant.jl tries to be minimally intrusive, but operator tracing may run into problems with control flow.
A companion sub-package, ReactantCore.jl, exposes the `@trace` macro, which correctly marks control-flow constructs (`if`, `for`, etc.) during tracing.
The `@trace` translates to a no-op if evaluated outside of the Reactant compilation context, allowing Reactant integration of the broader Julia ecosystem without fully depending on Reactant.
```
